doc: document release criteria (#56792)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/project/release_process.rst

.. _release_quality_criteria:

Release Criteria
****************

The main motivation is to clearly have the criteria in place that must be met for a public releases to ship.
This will help define when a release is "done" in terms that most people can
understand and in ways that help new people to understand the process and
participate in creating successful releases:

- The release criteria documents all the requirements of our target audience for each Zephyr release
- The target audiences for each public release can be different, and may overlap
- The criteria at any given time are not set in stone: there may be requirements
  that have been overlooked, or that are new, and in these cases, the criteria
  should be expanded to ensure all needs are covered.

Below is the high level criteria to be met for each release:

- No blocker bugs
- All relevant tests shall pass on Tier 0 platforms
- A test subset shall pass on Tiers 0 and 1 (at least 1 per architecture/architecture variant/Hardware features)
- All samples/tests shall build on Tiers 0, 1 and 2
- All high and critical static analysis and security issues addressed

> - Footprint/Performance Tracking (not specific KPIs)

Reviewer: also maybe misses a verb? "Footprint/Performance Tracking data is updated and available at XXX (no specific KPIs)"?

.. _release_quality_criteria:

Release Criteria
****************

The main motivation is to clearly have the criteria in place that must be met for a public releases to ship.

> This will help define when a release is "done" in terms that most people can

Reviewer: formatting seems inconsistent across the file (max line length)

understand and in ways that help new people to understand the process and
participate in creating successful releases:

- The release criteria documents all the requirements of our target audience for each Zephyr release
- The target audiences for each public release can be different, and may overlap
- The criteria at any given time are not set in stone: there may be requirements
  that have been overlooked, or that are new, and in these cases, the criteria
  should be expanded to ensure all needs are covered.

Below is the high level criteria to be met for each release:

> - No blocker bugs

Reviewer: i would be tempted to s/bug/issue/ across mostly the whole doc, except for the instances where we do mean "bug". as in a defect in code?
But not sure that will work with e.g. the current definition of blocker below. 
Just thinking about the "blocker" issue we had for 3.3 where we didn't want to ship until the issue with web analytics and cookie consent would be addressed.

- All relevant tests shall pass on Tier 0 platforms
- A test subset shall pass on Tiers 0 and 1 (at least 1 per architecture/architecture variant/Hardware features)
- All samples/tests shall build on Tiers 0, 1 and 2
- All high and critical static analysis and security issues addressed
- Footprint/Performance Tracking (not specific KPIs)
- License audits pass

> - Documentation Completeness and Release Notes

Reviewer: also maybe missing a verb

```suggestion
- Documentation is complete and Release Notes are up-to-date.
```

> - Per Subsystem release criteria + Testing

Reviewer: I would think that it's already implicitly assumed that the release criteria apply to all subsystems, so maybe drop it?

> - Reproducible Builds

Reviewer: would be worth expanding on what this means? Would adding "... (CI builds pass)" be enough maybe?

Bug Severity and Priority
=========================

> Priority of bugs is not enough to make release decisions and has been misused in
> the past to describe severity of an issue. Not all critical bugs are of highest

Reviewer: no need to make a reference to the past imo

```suggestion
Priority of bugs is not enough to make release decisions: not all critical bugs are of highest
```

priority and they do not need to be addressed in a release. Priority can also be
set high on less critical bugs.

Severity shall be used to classify bugs based on impact to users and community
in general, For examples:

- A kernel bug impacting every user can be set as critical or major, if it needs
  to be fixed in the next release, it will need to be marked as a blocker bug.
- A Kconfig option or DTS in a board is impacting a small group of users, so it
  could be minor or moderate but, a bug in hardware that is marked as a
  `reference hardware`` can be major or critical and in some cases a release
  blocker.

Bug priorities can be used by owners of bugs in an area or subsystem to manage
their workflow and priorities.
A low or moderate bug in a platform might be set to `High Priority` by the
owner to manage execution within a subsystem or by a hardware vendor.

Severity
--------
The extent to which an issue or defect can affect the software and defines the
impact that a given defect has on the system.

The following severities shall be used:

> - Blocker: Such an error makes it impossible to proceed with using or testing
>   the software. See below for more details.
> - Critical: bug results in a crash of the system or one or more components of
>   the system. If the failed function is unusable and
>   there is no acceptable alternative method to achieve the advertised desired
>   outcome then the severity will be stated as critical
> - Major: As with critical, but an acceptable alternative exists
> - Moderate: Causes the system to produce incorrect, incomplete or inconsistent results
> - Minor: No crashes or damage to usability of the system and desired
>   results can be easily obtained by working around the defects
> - Cosmetic: Related to look and feel of the system

Reviewer: I suggest using a table here for improved readability

```suggestion
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Severity | Description                                                      |
+==========+==================================================================+
| Blocker  | Such an error makes it impossible to proceed with using or       |
|          | testing the software. See below for more details.                |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Critical | Bug results in a crash of the system or one or more components   |
|          | of the system. If the failed function is unusable and there is   |
|          | no acceptable alternative method to achieve the advertised       |
|          | desired outcome then the severity will be stated as critical.    |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Major    | As with critical, but an acceptable alternative exists.          |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Moderate | Causes the system to produce incorrect, incomplete, or           |
|          | inconsistent results.                                            |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Minor    | No crashes or damage to usability of the system and desired      |
|          | results can be easily obtained by working around the defects.    |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Cosmetic | Related to look and feel of the system.                          |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
```

Severity shall be set based on the context of the bug and not in relation to the
overall impact on the codebase. For example, a bug in an optional subsystem that
results in a crash shall be marked as `critical` even if the bug does not impact
every user of Zephyr.

> 

Reviewer: nit: extra blank line

Blocker Bugs
============

Blocker bug process kicks during the release process and is in effect after the
feature freeze milestone. An issue labeled as a blocker practically blocks a
release from happening. All blocker bugs shall be resolved before a release is
created.

> After hard freeze (RC3), a change to the codebase can only be merged to ‘main'
> and included in the release if it fixes a bug that is granted blocker or freeze
> exception status.

Reviewer: I would swap it around (we are in the section talking about blockers, not the section about what milestones and RC3 mean, if that makes sense)

```suggestion
A bug that is granted `blocker` status can be merged to 'main' and included in the release all the way until the hard freeze (RC3) milestone.
```

Bugs of moderate severity and higher are typically the candidates to be promoted
to blocker bugs.

The following guidelines shall be followed for release blocker bugs:

- Only mark bugs as blockers if the software (Zephyr) must not be released with the bug present.
- All collaborators can add or remove blocking labels.
- Evaluate bugs as potential blockers based on their severity and prevalence.
- Provide detailed rationale whenever adding or removing a blocking label.
- Ensure all blockers have the milestone tagged.

> - Release owners have final say on blocking status; contact them with any questions.

Reviewer 2: My primary problem with having High, Medium, Low and Blocker status is what is the point then of the High/Medium/Low? To me, if it is a blocker bug then it is a High bug. It has to be fixed. We used to not allow a release to occur if a High bug occurred but now we do because of this concept of a blocker. So the effect is that a Blocker is a "higher level" bug. If I would apply a numeric to this then it would be

1 - Blocker
2 - High
3 - Medium
4 - Low

Effectively 4 levels/classifications of bugs. Now I know you are really using "blocker" as an overlay modifier but I don't see the point. It is a class 1 bug that must be fixed or the release can't happen.

Reviewer 3: I'm with David on this, not clear what we'll do with all the categorization, ultimately it's a binary decision on whether to release or not.

Reviewer 4: I view it as an indicator to external parties to use when making an assessment on the state of the release and if they will want to upgrade to it.  The project likely will only use a binary setting, but external entities may need more detail to make a decision on an upgrade.  For example, upgrading to a release there may exist a security or safety requirement that requests we make a detailed audit of the "High" issues.  The project isn't using them, but the snapshot of state at release is something many groups use for determining upgrades.

Hardware Support Tiers
======================

Tier 0: Emulation Platforms
---------------------------

- Failures can block Pull Requests.
- Supported by the Zephyr project itself, commitment to fix bugs in releases.
- One is required for each new architecture.

> - Bugs reported against platforms of this tier are to be evaluated and treaeted as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Bugs reported against platforms of this tier are to be evaluated and treated as
```

  a general bug in Zephyr and should be dealt with the highest priority.

Tier 1: Supported Platforms
---------------------------

> - with commitment from a specific team to run tests using twister device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Commitment from a specific team to run tests using twister device
```

  testing for the "Zephyr compatibility test suite" (details TBD)
  on a regular basis using open drivers.
- Commitment to fix bugs in time for releases. Not supported by "Zephyr Project" itself.
- Other quality of developer experience criteria TBD.
- General availability for purchase (modulo silicon supply chain crisis).

> - Bugs reported against platforms of this tier are to be evaluated and treaeted as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Bugs reported against platforms of this tier are to be evaluated and treated as
```

- Footprint/Performance Tracking (no specific KPIs)
- License audits pass
- Documentation is complete and Release Notes are up-to-date.
- Per Subsystem release criteria + Testing
- Reproducible Builds

Bug Severity and Priority
=========================

Priority of bugs is not enough to make release decisions: not all critical bugs are of highest
priority and they do not need to be addressed in a release. Priority can also be
set high on less critical bugs.

Severity shall be used to classify bugs based on impact to users and community
in general. For example:

- A kernel bug impacting every user can be set as critical or major. If it needs
  to be fixed in the next release, it will need to be marked as a blocker bug.
- A Kconfig option or DTS in a board is impacting a small group of users, so it
  could be minor or moderate but, a bug in hardware that is marked as a
  `reference hardware` can be major or critical and in some cases a release
  blocker.

Bug priorities can be used by owners of bugs in an area or subsystem to manage
their workflow and priorities.
A low or moderate bug in a platform might be set to `High Priority` by the

> owner to manage execution within a subsystem or by a hardware vendor.

Reviewer 2: Should we just remove priority from our documentation and just document severity/impact with the additional modifier of "blocker" for issues that we deem needing a fix before release.

Author: Based on the discussions we had, priority can be used by teams and maintainers.  We should leave this at least for now and see how things will work out and can be removed later.

created.

After hard freeze (RC3), a change to the codebase can only be merged to ‘main'
and included in the release if it fixes a bug that is granted blocker or freeze
exception status.

Bugs of moderate severity and higher are typically the candidates to be promoted
to blocker bugs.

The following guidelines shall be followed for release blocker bugs:

- Only mark bugs as blockers if the software (Zephyr) must not be released with the bug present.
- All collaborators can add or remove blocking labels.
- Evaluate bugs as potential blockers based on their severity and prevalence.
- Provide detailed rationale whenever adding or removing a blocking label.
- Ensure all blockers have the milestone tagged.
- Release owners have final say on blocking status; contact them with any questions.

Hardware Support Tiers
======================

Tier 0: Emulation Platforms
---------------------------

- Failures can block Pull Requests.
- Supported by the Zephyr project itself, commitment to fix bugs in releases.
- One is required for each new architecture.
- Bugs reported against platforms of this tier are to be evaluated and treaeted as

>   a general bug in Zephyr and should be dealt with the highest priority.

Reviewer 2: Highest priority should they have the "blocker" modifier?

Author: they could be a blocker if there is a justification, I would not say they are automatically blockers.

Author: > but this is where I get mentally caught up with "priority" "severity" "impact" "blocker". Too many terms with too many implied meanings

not sure why you are putting impact in here as if it is something else we have to track, this is just the same as severity, I mentioned that in the context of coverity, but Impact=Severity. 

Blocker is used to mark any bug or issue of any severity as something that needs to be addressed before a release, everything else can be addressed later and should not block the release. 

Some critical bug in an optional subsystem might not be considered as something that should block a release, if it should, it will get the blocker label, but not all critical bugs are blockers.

Reviewer 4: These lines on the Tier criteria setting a priority also confuse me.  Especially since line 134 of this document states:

> Bug priorities can be used by owners of bugs in an area or subsystem to manage
their workflow and priorities.

But here (and in the lower Tier definitions) the document is specifically stating a priority for the bug/issue filed.  Is s/priority/severity needed here?

Author: We should be able to use the term priority without having a label for it, to avoid any confusion maybe use urgency?

every user of Zephyr.

Blocker Bugs
============

Blocker bug process kicks in during the release process and is in effect after the
feature freeze milestone. An issue labeled as a blocker practically blocks a
release from happening. All blocker bugs shall be resolved before a release is
created.

A bug that is granted `blocker` status can be merged to 'main' and included in
the release all the way until the hard freeze (RC3) milestone.

Bugs of moderate severity and higher are typically the candidates to be promoted
to blocker bugs.

The following guidelines shall be followed for release blocker bugs:

- Only mark bugs as blockers if the software (Zephyr) must not be released with
  the bug present.
- All collaborators can add or remove blocking labels.
- Evaluate bugs as potential blockers based on their severity and prevalence.
- Provide detailed rationale whenever adding or removing a blocking label.
- Ensure all blockers have the milestone tagged.
- Release owners have final say on blocking status; contact them with any questions.

Hardware Support Tiers
======================

Tier 0: Emulation Platforms
---------------------------

> - Failures can block Pull Requests.

Author: > Shouldn't introducing any bug (for any platform) in a PR be a valid reason to block a PR?

yes, this means a PR is blocked by CI in cases there are failures in those platforms, which we run in CI.

> The fact that we may only typically detect issues in tier 0 platforms in CI means we will normally only realize about those right away, but if somebody catches another bug by eye, or thru other tests that would still be a valid reason to reject it.

correct, that  is when you block a PR through review and requesting changes. The above is about blocking the PR in CI.

> Maybe this should say something in the lines of "Tests on tier 0 platforms are run per PR on CI, and therefore are the ones in which possible bugs will be detected earliest"

added that.

- Supported by the Zephyr project itself, commitment to fix bugs in releases.
- One is required for each new architecture.

> - Bugs reported against platforms of this tier are to be evaluated and treated as

Author: if issues on tier 0 platforms are not dealt with with the highest priority, development is stalled. I am most talking about post merge issues, not something in a PR which will be dealt with as a any other change and can just be rejected.

.. _release_quality_criteria:

Release Criteria
****************

The main motivation is to clearly have the criteria in place that must be met

> for a public releases to ship.  This will help define when a release is "done"

Reviewer 4: "for a public release to ship."

+==========+==================================================================+
| Critical | Bug results in a crash of the system or one or more components   |
|          | of the system. If the failed function is unusable and there is   |
|          | no acceptable alternative method to achieve the advertised       |
|          | desired outcome then the severity will be stated as critical.    |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Major    | As with critical, but an acceptable alternative exists.          |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Moderate | Causes the system to produce incorrect, incomplete, or           |
|          | inconsistent results.                                            |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Minor    | No crashes or damage to usability of the system and desired      |
|          | results can be easily obtained by working around the defects.    |
+----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Cosmetic | Related to look and feel of the system.                          |

> +----------+------------------------------------------------------------------+

Reviewer 3: Feels a bit too granular to me, but guess we can go with it and see how it works out. Bet we'll only end up using few of these.

Reviewer 4: I'll agree with @fabiobaltieri  here.  Not really sure there is a reason to have a difference between `Minor` and `Cosmetic` The rest of the classifications look correct to me.

Severity shall be set based on the context of the bug and not in relation to the
overall impact on the codebase. For example, a bug in an optional subsystem that
results in a crash shall be marked as `critical` even if the bug does not impact
every user of Zephyr.

Blocker Bugs
============

Blocker bug process kicks in during the release process and is in effect after the
feature freeze milestone. An issue labeled as a blocker practically blocks a
release from happening. All blocker bugs shall be resolved before a release is
created.

A bug that is granted `blocker` status can be merged to 'main' and included in
the release all the way until the hard freeze (RC3) milestone.

Bugs of moderate severity and higher are typically the candidates to be promoted
to blocker bugs.

The following guidelines shall be followed for release blocker bugs:

- Only mark bugs as blockers if the software (Zephyr) must not be released with

>   the bug present.

Reviewer 4: does the term "Zephyr" here include libraries?  To mean that reads more on the specific core kernel library than the whole ecosystem.  Just looking for clarification if, for example, some critical issue is found with LittleFS (or another module library) would that fall under this umbrella?

- All collaborators can add or remove blocking labels.
- Evaluate bugs as potential blockers based on their severity and prevalence.
- Provide detailed rationale whenever adding or removing a blocking label.
- Ensure all blockers have the milestone tagged.
- Release owners have final say on blocking status; contact them with any questions.

Hardware Support Tiers
======================

Tier 0: Emulation Platforms
---------------------------

- Failures can block Pull Requests.
- Supported by the Zephyr project itself, commitment to fix bugs in releases.
- One is required for each new architecture.
- Bugs reported against platforms of this tier are to be evaluated and treated as
  a general bug in Zephyr and should be dealt with the highest priority.

Tier 1: Supported Platforms
---------------------------

- Commitment from a specific team to run tests using twister device
  testing for the "Zephyr compatibility test suite" (details TBD)
  on a regular basis using open drivers.
- Commitment to fix bugs in time for releases. Not supported by "Zephyr Project"

>   itself.

Reviewer 3: Should we give an indication of expected time-to-resolution? Just to give a guideline of how a support team should be staffed. Commitment here means from the platform vendor, right?

Author: > Commitment here means from the platform vendor, right?

yes.

state of the software when it was released.

Long Term Support and Maintenance
---------------------------------

> A Zephyr LTS release is published every 2 years and is branched and maintained

Reviewer 5: I've had some feedback that says that the support period should actually be longer. The main reason being that it often takes 2 years just to get a product to market, and some product makers want longer-term stability.

On the other hand, Nordic, who bases the NRF Connect SDK on Zephyr needs the stability but also needs the feature updates on a regular basis. It's a bit of a double-edged sword.

Author: this is orthogonal, the LTS timeline and cadence it s a different topic to be changed sperately. I am not changing this text in this PR.
